Well,
some of the older Army types were skeptical,
but I think they all recognized the right thing to
do and the right move.
Of course, they would have rather had it under
their command. Sure. And they now have their own
Air Corps again. Sure. But
there wasn't, you and an instructor at West Point,
there wasn't any tension? No, because we're
getting graduates from West Point who are going
into the Air Corps every year. Sure. And from the
Naval Academy as well at that time until we
established the Air Corps together. Sure. All
right. You were on again and off again at West
Point. You were there from May of 46 to September of
47. Well, what I did was I went to Springfield
College and got my master's degree in physical
education. Oh, okay. That's just what I thought.
You were there at Springfield College from
September of 47 to June of 48, basically. Yeah. I
just got my master's degree. And why did you pick
Springfield College?
my predecessor had gone there and it was
recognized at that time it was recognized as the
best physical education school in the United
States and it's I don't know that it is still it's
the old YMCA what it is the YMCA college
it's had a physical education program that
outstanding program for years and most of the
leaders in the physical education field have been
graduates or have attended and gotten their
graduate degrees from there. How did you like it
there?
I enjoyed it. It was very difficult because I had
carried a heavy, heavy load of subjects. My wife
was pregnant. We had one small child. We rented an
apartment and had stoked the furnace. I'd get up at
5 o'clock in the morning and stoke the furnace and
feed them both breakfast because she couldn't
stand the smell of cooking. And then I'd come home.
She had morning sickness? No, the smell of cooking
made her sick. Oh.
She was miserable, I think. And I would leave and go
to school and be there all day and get home about 6.
And then feed them dinner and study until about 12
o'clock and stoke the furnace.
It was like a long grind. It was, but I enjoyed
it. And you received your master's. Well, I didn't
receive it then. I finished the courses. I had to
write a thesis.
After I wrote the thesis, I didn't get it until it
was done, until it was 51.
And had anything changed, or did you basically
continue for the next two years to teach the same
courses?
Well, the first year, I had been in charge of, I had
been the S4 for the office, which was in charge of
Office 5, and in charge of the gymnasiums, all the
facilities, and the cleaning up, and all that. In
the last two years, I was the operations officer. I
did all the scheduling,
looked up all the schedules. So it was a different
job, although
I didn't change anything when I was teaching. You
left West Point in July of 1950, and for six months
you were a student at Maxwell Air Force Base. Yeah,
the Air Command Staff College. Tell me about that.
That's the intermediate level of the Air Force of
the Air University, the Air Force Educational
System. And that's to teach
staff level
people to do staff level duties and to broaden
their aspects of it and look at the Air Force from a
different viewpoint and whatever they're using
narrowly then like you've done a fighter pilot all
the time just to spread you across so you can look at
the full perspective and look at all the look at
what the material officer does, what the office
officer does, what the personnel officer does,
what they all do, and prepare them for high-level
staff and command duty. So this was exactly what it
was for. How good was it? It was excellent. Very
good. Was it primarily based on the Army command
and general staff? I don't know what the Army
Command and General Staff had. It was developed by
the Air University. And your instructors were
mostly colonels?
I wouldn't say that they were mostly colonels.
Mostly lieutenant colonels and colonels.
How was the quality of instruction? The quality
was outstanding.
Very well done. They've done a good job forming the
Air University and getting it stocked with good
people. And why then after your completion in
December 1950 did you become the Assistant
Secretary and then the Secretary of the Air
University? Well... For the next three years?
Almost. It picked me off. Well,
a guy that had known me was a secretary. I had
nothing. Every major command, there's a shot at
whoever was a graduate there. They have a shot at
selecting who they want. I guess they had enough.
They selected
me. Put me in there. Well, why you? Were you an
outstanding student? Well, I
was a good student, yes, but I don't know why me any
more than anybody else. They looked at my record to
see where I'd been and what I'd done, I suppose.
They also gave you a promotion to Lieutenant
Colonel at the time, in 1950. Well, that promotion
probably came from my performance of the military
community,
probably. A lot of people during this time were not
being promoted at all, because of the United
States, well from 45 to 50 we were decreasing, and
you get an appointment
I think
it was
more than a record. It probably had to do with the
record
and the particular age group or group of people
that I was with in the rank
of major. I've been a major since 44. This was
temporary promotion. I guess I was in the eligible
group and got selected. Were you eager to go to
France? I sure was. I volunteered for it. I wrote a
letter. I knew the director of personnel, officer
personnel in Pentagon. I wrote a letter
volunteering. And that's the way I got to go. And
what did he... Well, you didn't go until September
of 1953. Well, I had to be jet qualified, and then I
had to check out in the airplanes. Okay. Well,
before we talk about jet qualifying, which, of
course, in April of 1953, you get the jet course,
tell me what you did as the assistant secretary and
secretary of the Air University. What does it
mean? What were your duties? I had charge of all the
records of all the students in the Air University.
So you're like a registrar. Yeah, like a
registrar. And I worked for the Director of
Education. And I wrote all his letters and
composed them. And I wrote all the letters to all
the guest speakers for the Air War College, Air
Command Staff College, where they were getting
the guest speakers. And I provided for their
billeting, their transportation, and we met
them. It
sounds pretty much like a fighter pilot at a desk
job. It sure was. What did you think of it? I wasn't
very happy. Well, I enjoyed it all right, but I'd
rather be in a flying organization. I figured I'd
learn something. What did you learn? I
learned a
lot about the Air Force by George Kenny, the
commander. I wrote letters for his signature. He
told me a lot of his experiences. I had another guy
named Barker, who was the vice commander. I
learned a lot from him. about
Hannon people. And my boss, of course, director of
education, third down in command. Non-rated
officer. He was a very brilliant man. Very
articulate. Inspiring.
You must have had a lot of very important guests
come to your university and talk. I had to run the
Board of Visitors, too. It's a very prestigious
group. We have Notre Dame. We have MIT. We have
Georgia Tech. You name
it. One time or another, they come down and
evaluate the whole education system. Which is one
reason why I think it's so good. Because it has had
top level attention. I mean top range in the
country in terms of education. So it was a good
blend. I mean you got a lot of advice and gave advice
too to civilians. Yes. Nice. Did you have a good
working relationship? Beautiful working
relationship. With the civilians? With the
civilians. It was outstanding.
They were real, they were enthusiastic about it.
And it helped a lot too. In what way?
Recommendations. Sure. On improved quality of
education. How to improve the quality of the
education. So it doesn't seem to me that there was
any tension between the military officers
running their educational institution and the
university civilians. No. Very cooperative. As a
matter of fact, one of the schools at the Arizona
University has a degree granting
authorization. Which one? The Air Force
Institute of Technology at Black Patterson. They
give degrees in engineering,
aeronautical engineering, and graduate
degrees, too. Fantastic. That really is. Were you
happy to get to that jet course in April of 1953? I
was elated. That's what I had worked for.
I volunteered for them. Okay, now tell me about
this from April of 1953 to August of 1953. What type
of jets were you using? FASXs? Well, I checked out.
I did a qualification course in the T-33 at Craig
Air Force Base. I was part of the training command
at that time. Then I went to Nellis Air Force Base
and started out by qualifying in the F-80 and
diabolomic strafing
and combat tactics and so forth. And then went into
the F-86. Qualified in the F-86. Theoretically
went over there to be in an F-86 organization. But
when I got there, this year's commander
put me in as director of safety for
the 7th Air Force. 5th Air Force. What was your
opinion of that mode, being director of safety? I
didn't want it, but I didn't have any choice, so I
just went in and did the best job I could. What did
you think of flying jets? This must have been your
first time, wasn't it? Yes, I enjoyed it. It was
completely different because you forgot about
TARC. You didn't have to worry about TARC. You
didn't have to worry about takeoff control.
The acceleration
is not
there that you have
on a prop aircraft. The acceleration of the
airplane is low speed. And the reaction is not the
same. It's harder to fly formation, again, when
you tend to over-control the throttle. But it's a
great advance in aviation in these aircraft. What
about as far as the armaments, the firepower of the
F-86 versus those P-47s? Well, there's no
comparison to the F-86s. So much more firepower
than the other
F-86s. Just all the difference in the world. Now,
when you got to Korea, the war was almost over.
Yeah, the war was there.
But I did get into the 86 for a while. You did get to do
some flying in February of 54 and May of 54. You were
the commander of the 18th bomb group. Fighter
bomber. Yeah, fighter bomber group in Korea. You
didn't get to go on any missions because by that
time The war was over by that time. Yeah, but I did
get to do some experimental missions. Oh, really?
Tell me about those. They had some planes coming
down at night, and so we ran an experiment, the
F-86, to try to get on the tail of one of these with
radar.
get up close enough so you could eyeball it and
shoot them down. We never were able to get it all
together. What do you mean you weren't able to?
Well, we had to be ready to go and then they would
scramble you off and vector you in by radar onto the
tail of the airplane. Then
you get close enough to eyeball it and shoot it
down. They never were able to vector, keep the
low-level aircraft on their scope enough to give
us enough perspective to give him enough time so
that we could intercept it.
How'd you get along with the Koreans? Did you fly at
all with any of the Korean Air Force, or didn't they
have jets at this time? We got along fine with them.
I don't think we had jets at that time. Did you fly
any joint missions with them? No. How about with
other U.N. forces? We had a squadron of South
Africans. They went home. How'd you get along with
them? Great.
They were terrific people. Very enthusiastic.
They were pretty wild. Wild in what way? Well, they
liked to party.
They had their own little club. They had arm
wrestling, leg wrestling. Oh, kidding. Yeah.
And, uh, corrals. They really sang
and acted like Zulu warriors. Did they get along
pretty well? Yes, they got along great. That's
what they were like. And we also had some
Australians on the legs, too. They were real nice,
too.
How were they? Were they as well trained as we were
in America? Well, I really had no access to their
abilities, except that they flew well.
Seemed to be well trained. Okay. Speaking of South
Africans,
And during the war in Korea, of course, we did
integrate the forces, ship from segregated units
to integrated units. Did this have any impact on
the Air Force when you were over in Korea? Not
really. Dan Davis came over and took over one of the
wings. I inspected him and gave him a safety
inspection. He's a close friend of mine. I like
him. No problem. He had no race problems? They
may have had some in the Army, but we didn't have any
aircraft.
Oh, really? Well,
I don't know. There were quite a
few. There were several that Steve had. We had had
in the war, hadn't we? There were quite a few. I
don't have any feel for the numbers, but there were
quite a few. Oh, is your opinion that Truman's move
to integrate the armed forces? I think he was
right. Probably. think we should be okay of course
it came much earlier than the rest of the society
and some some officers charged at the time back in
48 that the at the air force the military the armed
forces in general uh were being or shouldn't be the
social engineers for the rest of the society did
you hear any of this
No, not really. You thought it was a good move,
though? I thought it was a good move. OK. Also
during the mid-1950s, there was the rise of the
Strategic Air Command. And other Air Force
officers have told me that there was
some feelings of Air Force officers who weren't
with SAC about that command. No,
I think it's very necessary command, and I think it
was handled well, and they did give them a priority
that enabled them to get what they got, but that's
what it took to get it.
They did neglect the tactical air command, which
they did or did not. They did in favor of the
strategic air command, but that was
understandable in my opinion because
the tactical air command is support for the Army.
And what we needed was strategic air, which we
didn't have, and we needed. That's the way we got
it.
Although I didn't want to be in the security
command, I think it's proven its effectiveness
and its usefulness. Why didn't you want to be in it?
I wanted to be a fire pilot, not a bomber pilot. You
yourself never felt tense or anxious about the
fact that SAC was getting higher priority than
TAC?
Well, I may have had a little feeling about that,
but I saw the reason for it. It
didn't upset me, because I did see the reason. How
about the other fighter pilots? Did they see the
reason? No. Was there tension between TAC and SAC?
I don't know about tension. It may have been
resentment. Do you remember any examples
of resentment? I don't know. Specific
examples, no. OK, and hard. That's hard to think
back and think of specifically. I've heard
opinions of us at the Air University. What was
their opinion? By TAC members, these are the SACs.
What was the general feeling at the Air
University? Well, the Air University was
far-sighted
all the way.
probably the origins thing. Well, of course,
during this period, TV movies were glamorizing
the Strategic Air Command. There were a couple of
movies about these dashing young bomber pilots
and their role in the mission. Did this create any
jealousy or hard feelings in TAC?
I don't think so. Did you see any of those movies? I
doubt it. I don't go to movies. Okay. Also at this
time, 53, you became a full colonel.
What were your feelings when you heard that? I
didn't believe it. Why not? I don't know.
Well, competition was pretty keen. It sure is. It
is and was. Very keen.
That's not to say I wasn't extremely pleased and
happy.
Well, you always think there's a possibility. The
probability is quite small.
Selection,
you've got more competition to be a general and a
colonel than you
do anywhere else. Okay. Here we are in 1954, and you
have a series of assignments.
Arbitration Committee. Oh, that's what I... I was
moved and I was sent to... Nellis Air Force Base. I
was sent home early to be on the representative for
the Far Eastern Air Command on the Arbitration
Committee for the Fighter
Reference. Not much of a job. It was only a month.
Well, you know, you're just there during the
exercises, during the competition.
And then what do you do, basically grade the
competition? No, the arbitration committee
solves disputes and questions of rules and
regulations and protests and the final
determination of who's the winner.
How did you like that type of assignment? It wasn't
much of an assignment. It was a boondocking for it,
I was concerned. I stayed in Las Vegas. Oh, did you
in Las Vegas? No, I stayed out at the base because
you could go to Las Vegas every night. That sounds
like more fun than work. It was more fun than work.
Okay, so then you had another quick assignment in
Texas, the advanced flying school. Well, I went to
Perrin Air Force Base as the group commander, and
they sent me through the F-86 flying school, the
F-86D, which is the interceptor. So I just went
through the course. And then you became the
commander of the group, training group. Of the
training group. And you did that for about a year
and a half, from October 54 to January 1956. Now,
what were major challenges at that job?
Well, the F-86D was a complicated electronic
machine. And we were also trying to determine how
well the weapon system worked. And we did a lot of
evaluation of the firing system down at Matagorda
Island. And we were able to get our airplanes
combat ready. They were able to fire the rockets
and hit
the target. The challenge was to qualify the
students. How many students did you usually have
in a class?
Gee, that's hard to remember. I think we were
around 50.
40 to 50 students per class, and you'd have about
three classes there at a time.
One would be in academics, one would be in
instrument training, and the other one would be in
. I gave her instrument training in .
Because
this was an all-weather aircraft. And we
qualified everybody. Even though we already had
an estimate card, we re-qualified to make sure
they could fly in a jet aircraft. Because we got
some people who had not been particularly
experienced in jet aircraft. Sure. And then we
checked them out every six. And we had a flying crew
there, too. Because you had earlier schools
checking you out back in the 40s on prop planes, and
now here you are checking other people out on jet
planes. What kind of changes did the Air Force have
to make? I mean, did they increase the length of the
school? Yes, we increased the ground school part
of it. Familiarization with the airplane was a lot
longer and much more complicated. more
complicated systems. Sure. And you had to
understand how the systems work and how they
relate to each other. And to know when an airplane
was safe to fly and when it wasn't safe to fly. And
also what the emergency procedures are, what you
do if this fails or that fails. And we also had
simulator, which
We had completely new technology. And you could
put the guy under the hood and have him take the
airplane off and land it without effort.
And he could simulate a complete mission. I bet you
that. Intercept training and everything else.
We'd give him intercept training. Right in the
simulator? Right in the simulator, which is an
innovation at that time. I bet. And now we've got it
in all of them. Sure, but isn't it? At that time, it
was a real innovation.
So
you probably had very low amount or percentage of
crashes by the 50s after the simulator than in the
40s, is that true? That's true. As a matter of fact,
safety has been a prime mission of the Air Force.
Sure,
absolutely. And
in comparison with your command at the training
group, in comparison with other training groups
in the country, how was your accident rate?
Well, I don't know how it was compared with it. But
didn't they give you comparative figures? Oh,
yes, they gave you comparative figures, but I sure
as heck can't remember. Oh. The accident rate in
the F-86D was fairly
high per flying hour, because that's the way they
measure. There's so many accidents per 100,000
flying hours. The frequency of accidents was
relatively low. It's your only airborne short
time. So your exposure is greater on takeoff and
landing
than it is at any other time. You could take a V-52
and keep it up for 20 to 30 hours and only be exposed
to one landing and one takeoff. Sure. Whereas if
you took a fighter airplane, you'd have about 30
missions. Sure. that's 30 take-offs. That's a lot
more exposure to the dangerous part of it. And also
you've got the reliability of an engine. One
engine versus six.
So you can, sure, your odds are greater. What was
your opinion then of the quality of the B-52 and now
of its Because there's been a lot of controversy
about this, I think. Well, the B-52, in the
beginning, was a hell of an airplane. And it could
walk away from an F-86D, climb up the altitude. The
F-86D was not in the performance range that we have
now. But the B-52 was a good airplane. But we need a
bigger, faster, probably not necessarily
bigger, but a faster and better airplane than the
B-52. We need the B-1. And how do you feel about the
cruise missile and the deployment of the cruise
missile and the B-52? I think we ought to have the
cruise missile and the B-52.
Not build the B-1, but wanted to just put the cruise
missile in the B-52. And what was your opinion of
that? I think he made a mistake. A big mistake. It
helped get him defeated, I think. So, you'd want
both then? Yes. You want the B-1 and the cruise
missile in the B-52?
I think we need them both. Okay, now just explain to
the layman himself what's the advantage of the
B-1, besides speed? Penetration. Penetration.
You can send all the missiles over where you want
to, but once you program them, that's all they got.
Once you program them, you have no control. Sure.
When you send a V1, you've got full control. And
you've also got a computer in there that can think,
not just react.
A guy can change. He can alter. He can alter his
ultimate target or mission. Sure. Hold it.
And if something happens, he has the proper
procedures to follow. So more flexibility. More
flexibility and more capability. OK. OK. Now,
were you sorry that you left the command of the
training, or were you ready to leave that?
I was sorry to leave that command, very much so. I
let it be known that I'd rather stay there, but they
said, We want you down here. And then you came down
to Randolph Air Force Base, but only for about five
months. No, I was there about a year and a half. Oh,
I'm sorry. You're right. You were there from
February 56 to August 57. And what was your job
there? Director of Crew Training. I wrote the
syllabuses for all the crew training. We had the
F-86D. So this is basically a promotion, wasn't
it? Well, yeah. Because now you, as the director of
crew training, you're not just the commander of
one of the training groups, but now you're the
director of a number of commanders? Well, I was in
charge of all the training groups for all the crew
training air force bases. No kidding. We had the
F-100, F-4, and... We
had
the KC-97 rammed off. We had the helicopter
training. We had the special weapons training,
fighter training, bomber training, and special
weapons. And your job is? and design the courses?
Yes. So you're back in education again? Well, more
in training than education. It's training. You
must have had a good-sized staff to help you. I had
three good-sized staff. How many?
About 12 officers and airmen.
How'd you like that job?
It was a very challenging job.
It really was. To be familiar with all those
different training programs. There was a great
diversity of aircraft involved. I would think so.
How'd you ever stay on top of that? B-47s. We
actually had B-47 training. I grew up going on a
B-47 mission. It was very, very educational
to get involved with all these different programs
and then have to go up and training command and
defend them
and get the right number of days to just to help with
the courses they always want to shorten the
courses make them shorter we had to fight for all
the for the time you think they actually needed.
Now, who did you fight? Did you fight politicians
or did you fight... No, no, training command and
ESEF headquarters. Okay. We'd have a yearly
meeting with the training command headquarters
with people from the Pentagon.
Have a lockdown drag out of time, how much time it
took. Get them USAF to understand
what it took to produce what they love. It was
interesting. How could you ever become
proficient on all the different on training on all
the different types of airplanes? I couldn't. No
way I could, but I had people under me who were, who
had done it. So you selected experts on each plane?
I had experts in each area, too. Were you given
pretty much a free hand to pick these people? Well,
the director of personnel, if you had an opening,
the director of personnel would allow you to get
people you'd select from, Or if you knew someone
out in one of the bases. For instance, if I knew
somebody at Perrin and I wanted to be in charge of
interceptor training, I'd get, I could, if they
were available, I could get
them. Or they gave me, they'd send me folders and
say you select which one you want. What airplanes
were the toughest for our pilots to learn to fly,
which ones have the highest accident rate? Well,
being tough to fly and high accident rate don't
necessarily correlate. Oh, I know. I'm just
asking you two questions at once.
Gee, it'd be hard to put that in perspective.
I
don't
remember which one had the highest action rate. A
lot of them. I don't even remember which one had the
highest action rate. I do...
Things like when they were first checking out in
the B-26s, they talked about one a day in Tampa Bay.
Oh, really? And did you lose about one a day? That's
the way it looked like, but that's back when we were
old, too. We didn't know that. We just got that
rumor, I guess.
I really don't know which one I would select to be
the hardest to fly.
Did you have more mechanical problems with one
versus another? Because, you know, this is a big
question as far as... F-86D
was a very complicated airplane. And then it got
more complicated, though, when we got to the
F-105. The F-105 was the ultimate plane for one
guy. And ever since then, every airplane has had
two guys instead of one. And that's the F-105 right
there.
To
do the complete mission, I'd have to say that was
the hardest one to teach somebody to fly. The 105.
The 105. To do the complete mission.
Because you had to do it all yourself. And it
included low-level navigation. high-level
navigation, and atomic bomb delivery,
and gunnery,
and rocketry, bombing, a whole smidge of
everything.